Add Streams article (#4378)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/streams/index.md

### Pipe chains

Streams are primarily used by **piping** them to each other. A readable stream can be piped directly
to a writable stream, using the readable stream's `pipeTo()` method, or it can be piped through one
or more transform streams first, using the readable stream's `pipeThrough()` method. A **set of
streams piped together** in this way is referred to as a pipe chain.

### Backpressure

Once a pipe chain is constructed, it will propagate signals regarding how fast chunks should flow
through it. If any step in the chain cannot yet accept chunks, it propagates a signal backwards
through the pipe chain, until eventually the original source is told to stop producing chunks so
fast. This process of **normalizing flow** is called backpressure.

### Teeing

A readable stream can be teed (named after the shape of an uppercase 'T') using its `tee()` method.
This will **lock** the stream, that is, make it no longer directly usable; however, it will create **two new
streams**, called branches, which can be consumed independently.
Teeing also is important because streams cannot be rewound or restarted, more about this later.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./streams.svg" width="2099" height="1127" alt="Diagram of a pipe chain consisting of a readable stream coming from a call to the fetch API that is then piped through a transform stream whose output is teed and then sent to the browser for the first resulting readable stream and to the service worker cache for the second resulting readable stream.">

Author: ```suggestion
  <!-- Original source file located at https://drive.google.com/file/d/17apgoyo6E5RAA_nwwM5Xg4FGiMr8y3mk/view?usp=sharing -->
    <img src="./streams.svg" width="2099" height="1127" alt="Diagram of a pipe chain consisting of a readable stream coming from a call to the fetch API that is then piped through a transform stream whose output is teed and then sent to the browser for the first resulting readable stream and to the service worker cache for the second resulting readable stream.">
```

---
title: Streams—The definitive guide
subhead: Learn how to use readable, writable, and transform streams with the Streams API.
description: |
  The Streams API allows JavaScript to programmatically access streams of data received over the
  network and process them as desired.
authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2021-02-03

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-02-17
```

> date: 2021-02-17

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-02-18
```

---
title: Streams—The definitive guide
subhead: Learn how to use readable, writable, and transform streams with the Streams API.
description: |
  The Streams API allows JavaScript to programmatically access streams of data received over the
  network and process them as desired.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2021-01-18
# updated: 2021-01-18
hero: hero.jpg
alt: A forest stream with colored fallen leaves.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities
  - streams
---

> The Streams API allows you to programmatically access streams of data received over the network and

Reviewer: (_cough_ https://github.com/surma/observables-with-streams)

> The Streams API allows you to programmatically access streams of data received over the network and

Author: ```suggestion
The Streams API allows you to programmatically access streams of data received over the network
or created by whatever means locally and
```

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure about the wording here. It's kinda like saying "Promises allow you to programmatically access a sequence of bluetooth devices or any other local object".

While it's true that [you can get a promise for a sequence of bluetooth devices](https://webbluetoothcg.github.io/web-bluetooth/#dom-bluetooth-getdevices), it isn't really a direct feature of promises.

It seems more correct to say that the fetch API can be used to get a stream of network data.

> The Streams API allows you to programmatically access streams of data received over the network and

Author: Added "or created by whatever means locally" to make this clear.

> process them with JavaScript. Streaming involves breaking a resource that you want to receive down

Author: ```suggestion
process them with JavaScript. Streaming involves breaking a resource that you want to receive, send, or transform down
```

> process them with JavaScript. Streaming involves breaking a resource that you want to receive down

Author: Added "that you want to receive, send, or transform" explicitly.

into small chunks, and then processing these chunks bit by bit. While streaming is something
browsers do anyway when receiving assets like HTML or videos to be shown on webpages, this

> capability has never been available to JavaScript before.

Author: ```suggestion
capability has never been available to JavaScript before `fetch` with streams was introduced in 2015.

{% aside %}
  Streaming was possible with `XMLHttpRequest`, but it
  [really was not pretty](https://gist.github.com/igrigorik/5736866).
{% endAside %}
```

> capability has never been available to JavaScript before.

Author: Added the 2015 time stamp and an aside pointing to XHR streaming.

Previously, if you wanted to process a resource of some kind (be it a video, or a text file, etc.),

> you would have to download the entire file, wait for it to be deserialized into a suitable format,

Author: Is this user-exposed, though?

and then process the whole lot after it is fully received. With streams being available to
JavaScript, this all changes—you can now start processing raw data with JavaScript progressively as
soon as it is available on the client-side, without needing to generate a buffer, string, or blob.
This unlocks a number of use cases, some of which I list below:

> - **Video effects:** piping a readable video stream through a transform stream that applies effects

Author: I don't :-(

  in real time.
- **Data (de)compression:** piping a file stream through a transform stream that selectively
  (de)compresses it.
- **Image decoding:** piping an HTTP response stream through a transform stream that decodes bytes
  into bitmap data, and then through another transform that translates bitmaps into PNGs. If
  installed inside the `fetch` hook of a service worker, this allows you to transparently polyfill
  new image formats like AVIF.

## Core concepts

Before I go into details on the various types of streams, let me introduce some core concepts first.

### Chunks

A chunk is a **single piece of data** that is written to or read from a stream. It can be of any

> type; streams can even contain chunks of different types. A chunk will often not be the most atomic

Author: ```suggestion
type; streams can even contain chunks of different types. Most of the time, a chunk will not be the most atomic
```

> type; streams can even contain chunks of different types. A chunk will often not be the most atomic

Author: Done.

unit of data for a given stream. For example, a byte stream might contain chunks consisting of 16

> KiB `Uint8Array` units, instead of single bytes.

Author: We could, but it is really just an example without concrete practical use without context.

### Readable streams

A readable stream represents a source of data, from which you can read. In other words, data **comes
out** of a readable stream. Concretely, a readable stream is an instance of the `ReadableStream`
class.

### Writable streams

A writable stream represents a destination for data, into which you can write. In other words, data
**goes in** to a writable stream. Concretely, a writable stream is an instance of the
`WritableStream` class.

### Transform streams

> A transform stream consists of a **pair of streams**: a writable stream, known as its writable side,

Author: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simultaneous_interpretation it is :-)

> and a readable stream, known as its readable side. In a manner specific to the transform stream in

Author: ```suggestion
and a readable stream, known as its readable side.
A real-world metaphor for this would be a
[simultaneous interpreter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simultaneous_interpretation)
who on-the-fly translates from one language to another.
In a manner specific to the transform stream in
```

as a transform stream. However, the standard `TransformStream` class makes it much easier to create
such a pair that is properly entangled.

### Pipe chains

Streams are primarily used by **piping** them to each other. A readable stream can be piped directly
to a writable stream, using the readable stream's `pipeTo()` method, or it can be piped through one
or more transform streams first, using the readable stream's `pipeThrough()` method. A **set of
streams piped together** in this way is referred to as a pipe chain.

### Backpressure

Once a pipe chain is constructed, it will propagate signals regarding how fast chunks should flow
through it. If any step in the chain cannot yet accept chunks, it propagates a signal backwards
through the pipe chain, until eventually the original source is told to stop producing chunks so
fast. This process of **normalizing flow** from the original source according to how fast the chain
can process chunks is called backpressure.

### Teeing

A readable stream can be teed (named after the shape of an uppercase 'T') using its `tee()` method.
This will lock the stream, making it no longer directly usable; however, it will create **two new

> streams**, called branches, which can be consumed independently.

Author: ```suggestion
streams**, called branches, which can be consumed independently.
Teeing also is important because streams cannot be rewound or restarted, more about this later.
```

> streams**, called branches, which can be consumed independently.

Author: Added with a reference to "later".

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./streams.svg" width="2099" height="1127" alt="Diagram of a pipe chain consisting of a readable stream coming from a call to the fetch API that is then piped through a transform stream whose output is teed and then sent to the browser for the first resulting readable stream and to the service worker cache for the second resulting readable stream.">

Author: Do you mean `pipeTo`? The data is `pipeThrough()`'ed a transform stream. Not sure about how to add this to the diagram without looking contrived. Do you?

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">A pipe chain.</figcaption>
</figure>

> ## The mechanics of a readable stream

Author: Personally I *tend* to dislike this because it leaves you without a complete code snippet (or duplication with the pieces and then the whole). I think it mostly depends on how long the prose goes until the snippet comes. My idea here was to decouple the mechanics from the concrete code.

> ## The mechanics of a readable stream

Author: You're three now asking for this, so I will do it and interleave prose with example code :-)

> ## The mechanics of a readable stream

Reviewer 3: Looking at https://deploy-preview-4378--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/streams/, I still don't see example codes at the top of the article. Is this intended?

> ## The mechanics of a readable stream

Author: The code snippets starts here: https://deploy-preview-4378--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/streams/#creating-a-readable-stream. From there onward, I slowly build the example up.

> ## The mechanics of a readable stream

Author: I follow the same pattern in https://deploy-preview-4378--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/streams/#creating-a-writable-stream and https://deploy-preview-4378--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/streams/#creating-a-transform-stream.

> ## The mechanics of a readable stream

Reviewer 3: I would have liked some JS code earlier but it's a personal preference.

A readable stream is a data source represented in JavaScript by a
[`ReadableStream`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream) object that
flows from an underlying source. The
[`ReadableStream()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/ReadableStream)
constructor creates and returns a readable stream object from the given handlers. There are two
types of underlying source:

- **Push sources** constantly push data at you when you have accessed them, and it is up to you to

>   start, pause, or cancel access to the stream. Examples include video streams, Server-Sent Events,

Author: Good catch.

  or WebSockets.
- **Pull sources** require you to explicitly request data from them once connected to. Examples

>   include file access operations via `fetch()` or `XMLHttpRequest` calls.

Author: ```suggestion
  include HTTP operations via `fetch()` or `XMLHttpRequest` calls.
```

>   include file access operations via `fetch()` or `XMLHttpRequest` calls.

Author: Yepp, true indeed.

> The data is read sequentially in small pieces called **chunks**. A chunk can be a single byte, or it
> can be something larger such as a typed array of a certain size. A single stream can contain chunks

Author: ```suggestion
The data is read sequentially in small pieces called **chunks**.
Chunks can be any kind of JavaScript object, but there are streams that specialize
in sending byte data as `Uint8Array`s. A chunk can be a single byte, or it
can be something larger such as a typed array of a certain size. A single stream can contain chunks
```

> can be something larger such as a typed array of a certain size. A single stream can contain chunks

Author: Done.

of different sizes and types.

The chunks placed in a stream are said to be **enqueued**. This means they are waiting in a queue
ready to be read. An **internal queue** keeps track of the chunks that have not yet been read.

The queue is managed by a **queuing strategy** for the stream. The strategy's **high water mark**

> defines the total number of chunks that can be contained in the internal queue before backpressure

Author: Alright!

> defines the total number of chunks that can be contained in the internal queue before backpressure

Author: Fixed. Again MDN needs some cleansing, too.

> is applied and a **chunk size** that indicates the size to use for each chunk, in bytes.

Author: Fixed. MDN needs some fixing, too. I'll try once I land this.

The chunks inside the stream are read by a **reader**. This reader processes the data one chunk at a
time, allowing you to do whatever kind of operation you want to do on it. The reader plus the other
processing code that goes along with it is called a **consumer**.

The next construct in this context is called a **controller**. Each reader has an associated
controller that, as the name suggests, allows you to control the stream.

Only one reader can read a stream at a time; when a reader is created and starts reading a stream

> (that is, becomes an **active reader**), it is **locked** to it. If you want another reader to start

Author: ```suggestion
(that is, becomes an **active reader**), it is **locked** to it. If you want another reader to take over
```

> (that is, becomes an **active reader**), it is **locked** to it. If you want another reader to start

Author: Right. Replaced with "take over reading"

reading your stream, you typically need to **cancel** the first reader before you do anything else
(although you can **tee** streams).

### Creating a readable stream

You create a readable stream by calling its constructor
[`ReadableStream()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/ReadableStream).

> It has an optional argument called the stream's `underlyingSource`, which represents an object

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The constructor has an optional parameter `underlyingSource`, which represents an object
```

containing methods and properties that define how the constructed stream instance will behave. The
`underlyingSource` can contain the following optional, developer-defined methods:

#### The `underlyingSource`

- `start(controller)`: This method is called immediately when the object is constructed. The
  contents of this method should aim to get access to the stream source, and do anything else
  required to set up the stream functionality. If this process is to be done asynchronously, it can

>   return a promise to signal success or failure. The `controller` parameter passed to this method is

Author: ```suggestion
  return a promise to signal success or failure. A potentially existing `pull` will not be called until this promise
  fulfills. The stream will become errored if it rejects. The `controller` parameter passed to this method is
```

>   return a promise to signal success or failure. The `controller` parameter passed to this method is

Author: Done.

  a

>   [`ReadableStreamDefaultController`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultController)
>   by default.

Author: ```suggestion
  [`ReadableStreamDefaultController`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultController).
```

>   by default.

Author: Deferring to later then.

- `pull(controller)`: This method can be used to control the stream as more chunks are fetched. It
  will be called repeatedly when the stream's internal queue of chunks is not full, up until it
  reaches its high water mark. If `pull()` returns a promise, it will not be called again until that
  promise fulfills; if the promise rejects, the stream will become errored.
- `cancel(reason)`: This method gets called when the stream consumer cancels the stream.

The `ReadableStreamDefaultController` supports the following methods:

- [`ReadableByteStreamController.close()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableByteStreamController/close)
  closes the associated stream.
- [`ReadableByteStreamController.enqueue()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableByteStreamController/enqueue)
  enqueues a given chunk in the associated stream.
- [`ReadableByteStreamController.error()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableByteStreamController/error)

>   causes any future interactions with the associated stream to error.

Author: For `ReadableStreamDefaultController()`, this was actually [part of the beta release post](https://blog.chromium.org/2021/01/chrome-89-beta-advanced-hardware.html#:~:text=Expose%20ReadableStreamDefaultController%20interface). It should actually be `ReadableByteStreamDefaultController` here, I missed that.

> #### The `queuingStrategy`

Author: You get what you ask for :-)

The second, likewise optional, argument of the `ReadableStream()` constructor is `queuingStrategy`.
It is an object that optionally defines a queuing strategy for the stream, which takes two
parameters:

> - `highWaterMark`: A non-negative integer that defines the total number of chunks that can be

Author: Fixed.

  contained in the internal queue before backpressure is applied.
- `size(chunk)`: A method containing a parameter chunk that indicates the size to use for each

>   chunk, in bytes.

Author: Fixed.

the stream. The different possibilities are as follows:

- If a chunk is available, the promise will be fulfilled with an object of the form
  `{ value: chunk, done: false }`.
- If the stream becomes closed, the promise will be fulfilled with an object of the form
  `{ value: undefined, done: true }`.
- If the stream becomes errored, the promise will be rejected with the relevant error.

#### The `locked` property

You can check if a readable stream is locked by accessing its
[`ReadableStream.locked`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/locked)
property.

### Readable stream code samples

The code sample below shows all the steps in action. I first create a `ReadableStream` that in its
`underlyingSource` argument defines a `start` method that tells the stream's `controller` to
`enqueue()` the current time during 10 seconds and then to `close()` the stream. I consume this
stream by creating a reader via the `getReader()` method and calling `read()` until the stream is
`done`.

```js
let interval = null;

const stream = new ReadableStream({
  start(controller) {
    interval = setInterval(() => {

>       // Extract just the hh:mm:ss from the date.
>       let string = new Date().toISOString().replace(/.*?T(.*?)\..*?$/, '$1 ');

Author: ```suggestion
      let string = new Date().toLocaleTimeString();
```

>       let string = new Date().toISOString().replace(/.*?T(.*?)\..*?$/, '$1 ');

Author: Right. I was overthinking it. All we need is a simple string.

      // Add the string to the stream.
      console.log(`Enqueued ${string}`);
      controller.enqueue(string);
    }, 1_000);

    setTimeout(() => {
      clearInterval(interval);
      // Close the stream after 10s.
      controller.close();
    }, 10_000);
  },

  cancel() {
    // This is called if the reader cancels.
    clearInterval(interval);
  },

> });

Reviewer: (I have grown quite fond of using `this` in underlying sources. So you could use `this.intervalId = setInterval(...)`

> });

Author: Outsourced to its own function now.

let result = '';
const reader = stream.getReader();

const readStream = async () => {
  // The `read()` method returns a promise that
  // resolves when a value has been received.
  const { done, value } = await reader.read();
  // Result objects contain two properties:
  // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
  // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
  if (done) {
    return console.log(`Stream complete.\n${result}`);
  }
  result += value;
  console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
  console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
  // Read some more, and call this function again.

>   return readStream();

Author: ```suggestion
  readStream();
```

>   return readStream();

Author: I tend to err on the side of redundant `return`s, but have removed it.

> let result = '';
> const reader = stream.getReader();
> 
> const readStream = async () => {
>   // The `read()` method returns a promise that
>   // resolves when a value has been received.
>   const { done, value } = await reader.read();
>   // Result objects contain two properties:
>   // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
>   // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
>   if (done) {
>     return console.log(`Stream complete.\n${result}`);
>   }
>   result += value;
>   console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
>   console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
>   // Read some more, and call this function again.
>   return readStream();
> };
> readStream();

Reviewer 2: I think a recursive function is harder to understand than a loop. Eg:

```suggestion
async function concatStringStream(stream) {
  let result = '';
  const reader = stream.getReader();
  while (true) {
    // The `read()` method returns a promise that
    // resolves when a value has been received.
    const { done, value } = await reader.read();
    // Result objects contain two properties:
    // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
    // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
    if (done) return result;
    result += value;
    console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
    console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
  }
}

concatStringStream(stream)
  .then((result) => console.log('Stream complete', result));
```

Author: Went for your suggestion.

```

The next (a bit contrived) code sample shows how you could implement a "shouting" service worker
that uppercases all text by consuming the returned `fetch()` response promise
[as a stream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API/Using_readable_streams#consuming_a_fetch_as_a_stream)
and uppercasing chunk by chunk. The advantage of this approach is that you do not need to wait for
the whole document to be downloaded, which can make a huge difference when dealing with large files.

```js

> // Install immediately without waiting.

Author: Killed.

> // Install immediately without waiting.
> self.addEventListener('install', (event) => {
>   self.skipWaiting();
> });
> 
> // Claim all clients immediately.
> self.addEventListener('activate', (event) => {
>   clients.claim();
> });
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

self.addEventListener('fetch', (event) => {
  // If the destination of the request is anything else
  // than a document, return.
  if (event.request.destination !== 'document') {
    return;
  }
  event.respondWith(
    (async () => {
      // Create a new stream that implements the UPPERCASING.
      const result = await shoutFetch(event.request.url);
      // Return the newly created stream.
      return new Response(result.stream, { headers: result.headers });
    })(),
  );
});

const shoutFetch = async (url) => {
  // Chunks arrive encoded, so need to decode them.
  const textDecoder = new TextDecoder('utf-8', { stream: true });
  // After uppercasing, need to encode chunks again.
  const textEncoder = new TextEncoder();
  // Fetch the initial document and get access to the

>   // reader of the readable stream.
>   const response = await fetch(url);

Author: ```suggestion
  // reader of the readable stream. Error handling skipped for brevity.
  const response = await fetch(url);
```

>   const response = await fetch(url);

Author: "Skipped for brevity" comment added.

  const readableStream = response.body;
  const reader = readableStream.getReader();
  // Create a new stream.
  const responseStream = new ReadableStream({
    // Called whenever the internal queue of chunks is not full.
    async pull(controller) {
      // Read the next chunk.
      let result = await reader.read();
      // Close the stream when done.
      if (result.done) {
        return controller.close();
      }
      // Uppercase each chunk (after decoding it).
      const upperCaseValue = textDecoder.decode(result.value).toUpperCase();
      // Enqueue the uppercased value (afer re-encoding it).
      controller.enqueue(textEncoder.encode(upperCaseValue));
      return result;
    },

    // Called when the reader cancels.

>     cancel() {

Author: Not in this snippet.

      reader.cancel();
    },
  });
  // Return the new stream with the headers of the original response.

>   return await { stream: responseStream, headers: response.headers };

Reviewer 2: nah https://jakearchibald.com/2017/await-vs-return-vs-return-await/

>   return await { stream: responseStream, headers: response.headers };

Author: ```suggestion
  return { stream: responseStream, headers: response.headers };
```

>   return await { stream: responseStream, headers: response.headers };

Author: Thanks! Removed.

> };

Reviewer 2: This example would be much simpler as a transform stream, and also using the `TextDecoderStream` etc. If you're deliberately avoiding those, probably best to cover why.

Author: Here, the reader doesn't know about them yet :-) They are being introduced later. I will add a note that states this.

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

{% Aside %}
  This example would be much simpler as a transform stream,
  which I will introduce further down in the article. Stay tuned!
{% endAside %}
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

{% Aside %}
  This example would be much simpler as a transform stream,
  which I will introduce further down in the article. Stay tuned!
{% endAside %}

```

### Asynchronous iteration

Checking upon each `read()` iteration if the stream is `done` may not be the most convenient API.
Luckily there is a specified better way to do this: asynchronous iteration.

```js
for await (const chunk of stream) {
  console.log(chunk);
}
```

{% Aside 'caution' %} Asynchronous iteration is not yet implemented in any browser. {% endAside %}

> 
> #### Asynchronous iteration helper function

Author: ```suggestion
```

> #### Asynchronous iteration helper function

Author: Removed.

    },
    // for-await calls this on whatever it's passed, so
    // iterators tend to return themselves.
    [Symbol.asyncIterator]() {
      return this;
    },
  };
}

async function example() {
  const response = await fetch(url);
  for await (const chunk of streamAsyncIterator(response.body)) {
    console.log(chunk);
  }
}
```

### Teeing a readable stream

The [`tee()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/tee) method of the
`ReadableStream` interface tees the current readable stream, returning a two-element array
containing the two resulting branches as new `ReadableStream` instances. This is useful for allowing
two readers to read a stream simultaneously. You might do this for example in a service worker if
you want to fetch a response from the server and stream it to the browser, but also stream it to the
service worker cache. Since a response body cannot be consumed more than once, you need two copies
to do this. To cancel the stream, you then need to cancel both resulting branches. Teeing a stream
will generally lock it for the duration, preventing other readers from locking it.

```js
const readableStream = new ReadableStream({

>   async start(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  start(controller) {
```

>   async start(controller) {

Author: Done.

    // Called by constructor.
    console.log('[start]');
    controller.enqueue('a');
    controller.enqueue('b');
    controller.enqueue('c');
  },

>   async pull(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  pull(controller) {
```

>   async pull(controller) {

Author: Done.

    // Called read when controller's queue is empty.
    console.log('[pull]');
    controller.enqueue('d');
    controller.close();
  },

>   async cancel(reason) {

Author: ```suggestion
  cancel(reason) {
```

>   async cancel(reason) {

Author: Done.

    // Called when the stream is canceled.
    console.log('[cancel]', reason);
  },
});

> (async () => {

Author: So be it.

  // Create two `ReadableStream`s.
  const [streamA, streamB] = readableStream.tee();

>   // Read streamA iteratively one by one.

Author: The idea here is to show different ways of accessing the data. I will make this clearer.

  const readerA = streamA.getReader();
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "a", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "b", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "c", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "d", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: undefined, done: true}

  // Read streamB in a loop.
  const readerB = streamB.getReader();

>   for (let result = await readerB.read(); !result.done; result = await readerB.read()) {
>     console.log('[B]', result);
>   }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  while (true) {
    const result = await readerB.read();
    if (result.done) break;
    console.log('[B]', result);
  }
```

IMO easier to read and avoids duplicating `await readerB.read()`

as strings or array buffers in the case of WebSockets, whereas byte streams guarantee byte output.
In addition to that, being able to have BYOB readers has benefits in terms of stability. This is
because if a buffer detaches, it can guarantee that one does not write into the same buffer twice,
hence avoiding race conditions. BYOB readers can reduce the number of times the browser needs to run
garbage collection, because it can reuse buffers.

You can create a readable byte stream by passing an additional `type` parameter to the
`ReadableStream()` constructor.

```js
new ReadableStream({ type: 'bytes' });
```

You can then get access to a `ReadableStreamBYOBReader` by setting the `mode` parameter accordingly:
`ReadableStream.getReader({ mode: "byob" })`. This allows for more precise control over buffer
allocation in order to avoid copies. To read from the byte stream, you need to call
`ReadableStreamBYOBReader.read(view)`, where `view` is an
[`ArrayBufferView`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ArrayBufferView).

```js
const reader = readableStream.getReader({ mode: 'byob' });

let startingAB = new ArrayBuffer(1_024);
const buffer = await readInto(startingAB);

> console.log('The first 1,024 bytes: ', buffer);

Reviewer 2: (unless there are less than 1024 bytes in the stream)

Author: Correct :-) Updated the log.

> console.log('The first 1,024 bytes: ', buffer);

Author: ```suggestion
console.log('The first 1,024 bytes (or less): ', buffer);
```

async function readInto(buffer) {
  let offset = 0;

>   while (offset < buffer.byteLength) {

Reviewer 2: Ah, so it isn't required to fill the view you give it? I thought it might fill the view aside from the final chunk.

Author: I don't know the answer. This example comes from the explainer.

>     const { value: view, done } = await reader.read(
>       new Uint8Array(buffer, offset, buffer.byteLength - offset),

Author: ```suggestion
    const view = new Uint8Array(buffer, offset, buffer.byteLength - offset);
    const { value, done } = await reader.read(view);
    buffer = value.buffer;
```

>       new Uint8Array(buffer, offset, buffer.byteLength - offset),

Author: Yes :-)

      // feature allocates a buffer and passes it to us via byobRequest.
      const view = controller.byobRequest.view;
      view = crypto.getRandomValues(view);
      controller.byobRequest.respond(view.byteLength);
    },

    autoAllocateChunkSize: DEFAULT_CHUNK_SIZE,
  });
}
```

## The mechanics of a writable stream

A writable stream is a destination into which you can write data, represented in JavaScript by a
[`WritableStream`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStream) object. This
serves as an abstraction over the top of an **underlying sink**—a lower-level I/O sink into which
raw data is written.

The data is written to the stream via a **writer**, one chunk at a time. A chunk can take a
multitude of forms, just like the chunks in a reader. You can use whatever code you like to produce
the chunks ready for writing; the writer plus the associated code is called a **producer**.

When a writer is created and starts writing to a stream (an **active writer**), it is said to be
**locked** to it. Only one writer can write to a writable stream at one time. If you want another

> writer to start writing to your stream, you typically need to abort it, before you then attach

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
writer to start writing to your stream, you typically need to release it, before you then attach
```

another writer to it.

An **internal queue** keeps track of the chunks that have been written to the stream but not yet
been processed by the underlying sink.

The queue is managed by a **queuing strategy** for the stream. The strategy's **high water mark**

> defines the total number of chunks that can be contained in the internal queue before backpressure

Reviewer 2: HWM is a size not a count

Author: Fixed throughout.

> is applied and a **chunk size** that indicates the size to use for each chunk, in bytes.

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily bytes

Author: Fixed throughout.

- `abort(reason)`: This method will be called if the app signals that it wishes to abruptly close
  the stream and put it in an errored state. It can clean up any held resources, much like
  `close()`, but `abort()` will be called even if writes are queued up—those chunks will be thrown
  away. If this process is asynchronous, it can return a promise to signal success or failure. The
  `reason` parameter contains a `DOMString` describing why the stream was aborted.

The
[`WritableStreamDefaultController`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultController)
interface of the Streams API represents a controller allowing control of a `WritableStream`'s state
during set up, as more chunks are submitted for writing, or at the end of writing. When constructing
a `WritableStream`, the underlying sink is given a corresponding `WritableStreamDefaultController`
instance to manipulate. The `WritableStreamDefaultController` has only one method:
[`WritableStreamDefaultController.error()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultController/error),
which causes any future interactions with the associated stream to error.

> #### The `queuingStrategy`

Reviewer 2: See comments from the previous `queuingStrategy` section

Author: Fixed throughout.

`WritableStreamDefaultWriter`. The `getWriter()` method of the `WritableStream` interface returns a
new instance of `WritableStreamDefaultWriter` and locks the stream to that instance. While the
stream is locked, no other writer can be acquired until this one is released.

The [`write()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter/write)
method of the
[`WritableStreamDefaultWriter`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter)
interface writes a passed chunk of data to a `WritableStream` and its underlying sink, then returns
a promise that resolves to indicate the success or failure of the write operation. Note that what
"success" means is up to the underlying sink; it might indicate that the chunk has been accepted,
and not necessarily that it is safely saved to its ultimate destination.

#### The `locked` property

You can check if a writable stream is locked by accessing its
[`WritableStream.locked`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStream/locked)
property.

### Writable stream code sample

The code sample below shows all steps in action.

```js
const writableStream = new WritableStream({

>   async start(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  start(controller) {
```

>   async start(controller) {

Author: Done.

    console.log('[start]');
  },

>   async write(chunk, controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  write(chunk, controller) {
```

>   async write(chunk, controller) {

Author: Done.

    console.log('[write]', chunk);
    // Wait for next write.

>     await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000));

Author: ```suggestion
    return new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000));
```

>     await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1000));

Author: Sure. Done.

  },

>   async close(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  close(controller) {
```

>   async close(controller) {

Author: Done.

    console.log('[close]');
  },

>   async abort(reason) {

Author: ```suggestion
  abort(reason) {
```

>   async abort(reason) {

Author: Done.

    console.log('[abort]', reason);
  },

> });

Reviewer 2: Maybe create a more practical demo? Eg, creating a writable that appends chunks to a DOM element.

Author: Alright, will do.

> (async () => {

Reviewer 3: Same as before, let's remove this line.

Author: OK.

  const writer = writableStream.getWriter();
  const start = Date.now();
  for (const char of 'abcd') {
    // Wait to add write queue.

>     await writer.ready;

Reviewer 3: Was this example to show the use of `ready` or could it have been shorter with something like below?
```javascript
  for (const char of 'abcd') {
    await writer.write(char);
  }
  await writer.close();
```

Author: The idea was to show `.ready` indeed.

    console.log('[ready]', Date.now() - start, 'ms');
    // The Promise is resolved after the write finishes.
    writer.write(char);
  }
  await writer.close();
})();
```

### Piping a readable stream to a writable stream

A readable stream can be piped to a writable stream through the readable stream's
[`pipeTo()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/pipeTo) method.

> `ReadableStream.pipeTo()` pipes the current `ReadableStream`to a given`WritableStream` and returns a

Reviewer 3: Typo: space after "given" missing.

Author: Fixed.

> `ReadableStream.pipeTo()` pipes the current `ReadableStream`to a given`WritableStream` and returns a

Author: ```suggestion
`ReadableStream.pipeTo()` pipes the current `ReadableStream`to a given `WritableStream` and returns a
```

promise that fulfills when the piping process completes successfully, or rejects if any errors were
encountered.

```js
const readableStream = new ReadableStream({

>   async start(controller) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

>   async start(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  start(controller) {
```

    // Called by constructor.
    console.log('[start readable]');
    controller.enqueue('a');
    controller.enqueue('b');
    controller.enqueue('c');
  },

>   async pull(controller) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

    // Called when controller's queue is empty.
    console.log('[pull]');
    controller.enqueue('d');
    controller.close();
  },

>   async cancel(reason) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

>   async cancel(reason) {

Author: ```suggestion
  cancel(reason) {
```

    // Called when the stream is canceled.
    console.log('[cancel]', reason);
  },
});

const writableStream = new WritableStream({

>   async start(controller) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

>   async start(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  start(controller) {
```

    // Called by constructor
    console.log('[start writable]');
  },

>   async write(chunk, controller) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

>   async write(chunk, controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  write(chunk, controller) {
```

    // Called when writer.write()
    console.log('[write]', chunk);
  },

>   async close(controller) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

>   async close(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  close(controller) {
```

    console.log('[close]');
  },

>   async abort(reason) {

Reviewer 3: Nit: Remove unnecessary `async`

Author: Done.

>   async abort(reason) {

Author: ```suggestion
  abort(reason) {
```

    console.log('[abort]', reason);
  },

> });

Reviewer 2: If you do the 'write to DOM element' example above, you can use it here to make a more visual example

Author: Done.

> (async () => {

Reviewer 3: Once again, it's not needed there.
A comment though would be appreciated such as the console output.

Reviewer 3: I didn't expect `pull` for instance. Explaining it would be beneficial to users.
```
 [start readable]
 [start writable]
 [write] a
 [write] b
 [pull]
 [write] c
 [write] d
 [close]
 [finished]
```

- `flush(controller)`: This method is called after all chunks written to the writable side have been
  transformed by successfully passing through `transform()`, and the writable side is about to be
  closed. Typically this is used to enqueue suffix chunks to the readable side, before that too
  becomes closed. If the flushing process is asynchronous, the function can return a promise to
  signal success or failure; the result will be communicated to the caller of
  `stream.writable.write()`. Additionally, a rejected promise will error both the readable and
  writable sides of the stream. Throwing an exception is treated the same as returning a rejected
  promise.

### The `writableStrategy` and `readableStrategy` queueing strategies

The second and third optional argument to the `TransformStream()` constructor takes optional
`writableStrategy` and `readableStrategy` queueing strategies. They are defined as outlined in the
[readable](/streams/#the-queuingstrategy) and the [writable](/streams/#the-queuingstrategy-2) stream
sections respectively.

### Transform stream code sample

The following code sample shows a simple transform stream in action.

```js

> const transformStream = new TransformStream({

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const textEncoderStream = new TransformStream({
```

Also, maybe mention this exists in the platform already?

Author: Also mentioned that this exists now.

containing the two resulting branches as new `ReadableStream` instances. This is useful for allowing
two readers to read a stream simultaneously. You might do this for example in a service worker if
you want to fetch a response from the server and stream it to the browser, but also stream it to the
service worker cache. Since a response body cannot be consumed more than once, you need two copies
to do this. To cancel the stream, you then need to cancel both resulting branches. Teeing a stream
will generally lock it for the duration, preventing other readers from locking it.

```js
const readableStream = new ReadableStream({
  start(controller) {
    // Called by constructor.
    console.log('[start]');
    controller.enqueue('a');
    controller.enqueue('b');
    controller.enqueue('c');
  },
  pull(controller) {
    // Called read when controller's queue is empty.
    console.log('[pull]');
    controller.enqueue('d');
    controller.close();
  },
  cancel(reason) {
    // Called when the stream is canceled.
    console.log('[cancel]', reason);
  },
});

(async () => {
  // Create two `ReadableStream`s.
  const [streamA, streamB] = readableStream.tee();

>   // Read streamA iteratively one by one.

Author: ```suggestion
  // Read streamA iteratively one by one. Typically, you
  // would not do it this way, but you certainly can.
```

  const readerA = streamA.getReader();
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "a", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "b", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "c", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "d", done: false}
  console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: undefined, done: true}

>   // Read streamB in a loop.

Author: ```suggestion
  // Read streamB in a loop. This is the more common way
  // to read data from the stream.
```

`WritableStreamDefaultWriter`. The `getWriter()` method of the `WritableStream` interface returns a
new instance of `WritableStreamDefaultWriter` and locks the stream to that instance. While the
stream is locked, no other writer can be acquired until this one is released.

The [`write()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter/write)
method of the
[`WritableStreamDefaultWriter`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStreamDefaultWriter)
interface writes a passed chunk of data to a `WritableStream` and its underlying sink, then returns
a promise that resolves to indicate the success or failure of the write operation. Note that what
"success" means is up to the underlying sink; it might indicate that the chunk has been accepted,
and not necessarily that it is safely saved to its ultimate destination.

#### The `locked` property

You can check if a writable stream is locked by accessing its
[`WritableStream.locked`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WritableStream/locked)
property.

### Writable stream code sample

The code sample below shows all steps in action.

```js

> const writableStream = new WritableStream({
>   start(controller) {
>     console.log('[start]');
>   },
>   write(chunk, controller) {
>     console.log('[write]', chunk);
>     // Wait for next write.
>     return new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 1_000));
>   },
>   close(controller) {
>     console.log('[close]');
>   },
>   abort(reason) {
>     console.log('[abort]', reason);
>   },
> });
> 
> (async () => {
>   const writer = writableStream.getWriter();
>   const start = Date.now();
>   for (const char of 'abcd') {
>     // Wait to add write queue.
>     await writer.ready;
>     console.log('[ready]', Date.now() - start, 'ms');
>     // The Promise is resolved after the write finishes.
>     writer.write(char);
>   }
>   await writer.close();
> })();

Author: ```suggestion
const writableStream = new WritableStream({
  async start(controller) {
    console.log('[start]');
  },
  async write(chunk, controller) {
    console.log('[write]', chunk);
    // Wait for next write.
    await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(() => {
      document.body.textContent += chunk;
      resolve();
    }, 1_000));
  },
  async close(controller) {
    console.log('[close]');
  },
  async abort(reason) {
    console.log('[abort]', reason);
  },
});

const writer = writableStream.getWriter();
const start = Date.now();
for (const char of 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz') {
  // Wait to add write queue.
  await writer.ready;
  console.log('[ready]', Date.now() - start, 'ms');
  // The Promise is resolved after the write finishes.
  writer.write(char);
}
await writer.close();
```

`ReadableStream` interface tees the current readable stream, returning a two-element array
containing the two resulting branches as new `ReadableStream` instances. This is useful for allowing
two readers to read a stream simultaneously. You might do this for example in a service worker if
you want to fetch a response from the server and stream it to the browser, but also stream it to the
service worker cache. Since a response body cannot be consumed more than once, you need two copies
to do this. To cancel the stream, you then need to cancel both resulting branches. Teeing a stream
will generally lock it for the duration, preventing other readers from locking it.

```js
const readableStream = new ReadableStream({
  start(controller) {
    // Called by constructor.
    console.log('[start]');
    controller.enqueue('a');
    controller.enqueue('b');
    controller.enqueue('c');
  },
  pull(controller) {
    // Called read when controller's queue is empty.
    console.log('[pull]');
    controller.enqueue('d');
    controller.close();
  },
  cancel(reason) {
    // Called when the stream is canceled.
    console.log('[cancel]', reason);
  },
});

> (async () => {
>   // Create two `ReadableStream`s.
>   const [streamA, streamB] = readableStream.tee();
> 
>   // Read streamA iteratively one by one. Typically, you
>   // would not do it this way, but you certainly can.
>   const readerA = streamA.getReader();
>   console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "a", done: false}
>   console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "b", done: false}
>   console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "c", done: false}
>   console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "d", done: false}
>   console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: undefined, done: true}
> 
>   // Read streamB in a loop. This is the more common way
>   // to read data from the stream.
>   const readerB = streamB.getReader();
>   while (true) {
>     const result = await readerB.read();
>     if (result.done) break;
>     console.log('[B]', result);
>   }
> })();

Author: ```suggestion
// Create two `ReadableStream`s.
const [streamA, streamB] = readableStream.tee();

// Read streamA iteratively one by one. Typically, you
// would not do it this way, but you certainly can.
const readerA = streamA.getReader();
console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "a", done: false}
console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "b", done: false}
console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "c", done: false}
console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: "d", done: false}
console.log('[A]', await readerA.read()); //=> {value: undefined, done: true}

// Read streamB in a loop. This is the more common way
// to read data from the stream.
const readerB = streamB.getReader();
while (true) {
  const result = await readerB.read();
  if (result.done) break;
  console.log('[B]', result);
}
```

      resolve();
    }, 1_000));
  },
  async close(controller) {
    console.log('[close]');
  },
  async abort(reason) {
    console.log('[abort]', reason);
  },
});

const writer = writableStream.getWriter();
const start = Date.now();
for (const char of 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz') {
  // Wait to add write queue.
  await writer.ready;
  console.log('[ready]', Date.now() - start, 'ms');
  // The Promise is resolved after the write finishes.
  writer.write(char);
}
await writer.close();
```

### Piping a readable stream to a writable stream

A readable stream can be piped to a writable stream through the readable stream's
[`pipeTo()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/pipeTo) method.
`ReadableStream.pipeTo()` pipes the current `ReadableStream`to a given `WritableStream` and returns a
promise that fulfills when the piping process completes successfully, or rejects if any errors were
encountered.

```js
const readableStream = new ReadableStream({
  start(controller) {
    // Called by constructor.
    console.log('[start readable]');
    controller.enqueue('a');
    controller.enqueue('b');
    controller.enqueue('c');
  },

>   async pull(controller) {

Author: ```suggestion
  pull(controller) {
```

    // Called when controller's queue is empty.
    console.log('[pull]');
    controller.enqueue('d');
    controller.close();
  },
  cancel(reason) {
    // Called when the stream is canceled.
    console.log('[cancel]', reason);
  },
});

const writableStream = new WritableStream({
  start(controller) {
    // Called by constructor
    console.log('[start writable]');
  },
  write(chunk, controller) {

>     // Called when writer.write()

Author: ```suggestion
    // Called upon writer.write()
```

>     console.log('[write]', chunk);

Author: ```suggestion
    console.log('[write]', chunk);
    // Wait for next write.
    await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(() => {
      document.body.textContent += chunk;
      resolve();
    }, 1_000));
```

  },
  close(controller) {
    console.log('[close]');
  },
  abort(reason) {
    console.log('[abort]', reason);
  },
});

> (async () => {
>   await readableStream.pipeTo(writableStream);
>   console.log('[finished]');
> })();

Author: ```suggestion
await readableStream.pipeTo(writableStream);
console.log('[finished]');
```

    reader.releaseLock();
    break;
  }
  // value is a Uint8Array.
  console.log(value);
}

// Write to the serial port.
const writer = port.writable.getWriter();
const data = new Uint8Array([104, 101, 108, 108, 111]); // hello
await writer.write(data);
// Allow the serial port to be closed later.
writer.releaseLock();
```

Finally, the [`WebSocketStream`](/websocketstream/) API integrates streams with the WebSocket API.

```js
const wss = new WebSocketStream(WSS_URL);
const { readable, writable } = await wss.connection;
const reader = readable.getReader();
const writer = writable.getWriter();

while (true) {
  const { value, done } = await reader.read();
  if (done) {
    break;
  }
  const result = await process(value);
  await writer.write(result);
}
```

## Useful resources

- [Streams specification](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/)
- [Accompanying demos](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/demos/)
- [Streams polyfill](https://github.com/MattiasBuelens/web-streams-polyfill)
- [2016—the year of web streams](https://jakearchibald.com/2016/streams-ftw/)
- [Async iterators and generators](https://jakearchibald.com/2017/async-iterators-and-generators/)

## Acknowledgements

> This article was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley).

Author: ```suggestion
This article was reviewed by
[Jake Archibald](https://jakearchibald.com/),
[François Beaufort](https://github.com/beaufortfrancois),
[Sam Dutton](https://samdutton.com/), and
[Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley).
```

---
title: Streams—The definitive guide
subhead: Learn how to use readable, writable, and transform streams with the Streams API.
description: |
  The Streams API allows JavaScript to programmatically access streams of data received over the
  network and process them as desired.
authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2021-01-18

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-02-03
```

> date: 2021-01-18

Author: Done.

  [really was not pretty](https://gist.github.com/igrigorik/5736866).
{% endAside %}

Previously, if you wanted to process a resource of some kind (be it a video, or a text file, etc.),
you would have to download the entire file, wait for it to be deserialized into a suitable format,
and then process it. With streams being available to
JavaScript, this all changes—you can now start processing raw data with JavaScript progressively as
soon as it is available on the client-side, without needing to generate a buffer, string, or blob.
This unlocks a number of use cases, some of which I list below:

- **Video effects:** piping a readable video stream through a transform stream that applies effects
  in real time.
- **Data (de)compression:** piping a file stream through a transform stream that selectively
  (de)compresses it.
- **Image decoding:** piping an HTTP response stream through a transform stream that decodes bytes
  into bitmap data, and then through another transform that translates bitmaps into PNGs. If
  installed inside the `fetch` hook of a service worker, this allows you to transparently polyfill
  new image formats like AVIF.

## Core concepts

> Before I go into details on the various types of streams, let me introduce some core concepts first.

Author: Indeed.

### Chunks

A chunk is a **single piece of data** that is written to or read from a stream. It can be of any

> type; streams can even contain chunks of different types. Most of the time, a chunk will not be the most atomic

Author: You understand correctly, and it is important to know, since based on this you can't make any assumptions about a chunk and need to be careful when you process them.

unit of data for a given stream. For example, a byte stream might contain chunks consisting of 16
KiB `Uint8Array` units, instead of single bytes.

### Readable streams

A readable stream represents a source of data, from which you can read. In other words, data **comes
out** of a readable stream. Concretely, a readable stream is an instance of the `ReadableStream`
class.

### Writable streams

A writable stream represents a destination for data, into which you can write. In other words, data
**goes in** to a writable stream. Concretely, a writable stream is an instance of the

> `WritableStream` class.

Author: 😃 This makes me happy.

In a manner specific to the transform stream in
question, writes to the writable side result in new data being made available for reading from the
readable side. Concretely, any object with a `writable` property and a `readable` property can serve
as a transform stream. However, the standard `TransformStream` class makes it much easier to create
such a pair that is properly entangled.

### Pipe chains

Streams are primarily used by **piping** them to each other. A readable stream can be piped directly
to a writable stream, using the readable stream's `pipeTo()` method, or it can be piped through one
or more transform streams first, using the readable stream's `pipeThrough()` method. A **set of
streams piped together** in this way is referred to as a pipe chain.

### Backpressure

Once a pipe chain is constructed, it will propagate signals regarding how fast chunks should flow
through it. If any step in the chain cannot yet accept chunks, it propagates a signal backwards
through the pipe chain, until eventually the original source is told to stop producing chunks so
fast. This process of **normalizing flow** from the original source according to how fast the chain

> can process chunks is called backpressure.

Author: It was indeed somewhat redundant.

(although you can **tee** streams).

### Creating a readable stream

You create a readable stream by calling its constructor
[`ReadableStream()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/ReadableStream).
The constructor has an optional argument `underlyingSource`, which represents an object
with methods and properties that define how the constructed stream instance will behave. 

#### The `underlyingSource`

This can use the following optional, developer-defined methods:

- `start(controller)`: Called immediately when the object is constructed. The
  method can access the stream source, and do anything else
  required to set up the stream functionality. If this process is to be done asynchronously, the method can
  return a promise to signal success or failure. The `controller` parameter passed to this method is
  a
  [`ReadableStreamDefaultController`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultController)
  by default.
- `pull(controller)`: Can be used to control the stream as more chunks are fetched. It
  is called repeatedly as long as the stream's internal queue of chunks is not full, up until the queue

>   reaches its high water mark. If `pull()` returns a promise, it will not be called again until that
>   promise fulfills; if the promise rejects, the stream will become errored.

Author: ```suggestion
  reaches its high water mark. If the result of calling `pull()` is a promise, `pull()` will not be called again until said
  promise fulfills. If the promise rejects, the stream will become errored.
```

>   promise fulfills; if the promise rejects, the stream will become errored.

Author: I have rephrased this and split it into two sentences.

- `cancel(reason)`: Called when the stream consumer cancels the stream.

> The `ReadableStreamDefaultController` supports the following methods:

Author: ```suggestion
The `ReadableByteStreamController` supports the following methods:
```

or [`CountQueuingStrategy`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/CountQueuingStrategy)
for this object's value. If no `queuingStrategy` is supplied, the default used is the same as a
`CountQueuingStrategy` with a `highWaterMark` of `1`. {% endAside %}

#### The `getReader()` and `read()` methods

In order to read from a readable stream, you need a reader, which, by default, will be a
[`ReadableStreamDefaultReader`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultReader).
The `getReader()` method of the `ReadableStream` interface creates a reader and locks the stream to
it. While the stream is locked, no other reader can be acquired until this one is released.

The [`read()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStreamDefaultReader/read)
method of the `ReadableStreamDefaultReader` interface returns a promise providing access to the next
chunk in the stream's internal queue. It fulfills or rejects with a result depending on the state of
the stream. The different possibilities are as follows:

- If a chunk is available, the promise will be fulfilled with an object of the form<br>
  `{ value: chunk, done: false }`.

> - If the stream becomes closed, the promise will be fulfilled with an object of the form<br>

Author: These are actually the terms the spec uses. A stream "becomes" either "errored" or "closed".

  `{ value: undefined, done: true }`.

> - If the stream becomes errored, the promise will be rejected with the relevant error.

Author: Same as before, the spec term is "a stream becomes errored".

#### The `locked` property

You can check if a readable stream is locked by accessing its
[`ReadableStream.locked`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/locked)
property.

### Readable stream code samples

The code sample below shows all the steps in action. You first create a `ReadableStream` that in its
`underlyingSource` argument defines a `start` method that tells the stream's `controller` to

> `enqueue()` the current time during 10 seconds and then to `close()` the stream. You consume this

Author: ```suggestion
`enqueue()` a timestamp every second during ten seconds and then to `close()` the stream. You consume this
```

> `enqueue()` the current time during 10 seconds and then to `close()` the stream. You consume this

Author: I have rephrased.

stream by creating a reader via the `getReader()` method and calling `read()` until the stream is
`done`.

```js
const startEnqueuing = (controller) => {
  let interval = null;
  interval = setInterval(() => {
    const string = new Date().toLocaleTimeString();
    // Add the string to the stream.
    console.log(`Enqueued ${string}`);
    controller.enqueue(string);

>   }, 1_000);

Author: It's called [numeric separators](https://2ality.com/2018/02/numeric-separators.html). Just a way to group numbers in a more readable way. `1_000` is the same as `1000`.

```

The next code sample (a bit contrived) shows how you could implement a "shouting" version of `fetch()`
that uppercases all text by consuming the returned response promise
[as a stream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API/Using_readable_streams#consuming_a_fetch_as_a_stream)
and uppercasing chunk by chunk. The advantage of this approach is that you do not need to wait for
the whole document to be downloaded, which can make a huge difference when dealing with large files.

```js
function upperCaseStream() {
  return new TransformStream({
    transform(chunk, controller) {
      controller.enqueue(chunk.toUpperCase());
    },
  });
}

function appendToDomStream(el) {
  return new WritableStream({
    write(chunk) {
      el.append(chunk);
    }
  });
}

fetch('./lorem-ipsum.txt').then((response) =>
  response.body
    .pipeThrough(new TextDecoderStream())
    .pipeThrough(upperCaseStream())
    .pipeTo(appendToDomStream(document.body));
);
```

{% Aside %}
  This example would be much simpler as a transform stream,
  which I will introduce further down in the article. Stay tuned!
{% endAside %}

### Asynchronous iteration

> Checking upon each `read()` iteration if the stream is `done` may not be the most convenient API.

Author: ```suggestion
Checking upon each `read()` loop iteration if the stream is `done` may not be the most convenient API.
```

> Checking upon each `read()` iteration if the stream is `done` may not be the most convenient API.

Author: It was missing the word "loop", probably that's why it sounded wrong :-)

chunk in the stream's internal queue. It fulfills or rejects with a result depending on the state of
the stream. The different possibilities are as follows:

- If a chunk is available, the promise will be fulfilled with an object of the form
  `{ value: chunk, done: false }`.
- If the stream becomes closed, the promise will be fulfilled with an object of the form
  `{ value: undefined, done: true }`.
- If the stream becomes errored, the promise will be rejected with the relevant error.

#### The `locked` property

You can check if a readable stream is locked by accessing its
[`ReadableStream.locked`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/locked)
property.

### Readable stream code samples

The code sample below shows all the steps in action. I first create a `ReadableStream` that in its
`underlyingSource` argument defines a `start` method that tells the stream's `controller` to
`enqueue()` the current time during 10 seconds and then to `close()` the stream. I consume this
stream by creating a reader via the `getReader()` method and calling `read()` until the stream is
`done`.

```js

> let interval = null;
> 
> const stream = new ReadableStream({
>   start(controller) {
>     interval = setInterval(() => {
>       let string = new Date().toLocaleTimeString();
>       // Add the string to the stream.
>       console.log(`Enqueued ${string}`);
>       controller.enqueue(string);
>     }, 1_000);
> 
>     setTimeout(() => {
>       clearInterval(interval);
>       // Close the stream after 10s.
>       controller.close();
>     }, 10_000);

Author: ```suggestion
const startEnqueuing = (controller) => {
  let interval = null;
  interval = setInterval(() => {
    let string = new Date().toLocaleTimeString();
    // Add the string to the stream.
    console.log(`Enqueued ${string}`);
    controller.enqueue(string);
  }, 1_000);

  setTimeout(() => {
    clearInterval(interval);
    // Close the stream after 10s.
    controller.close();
  }, 10_000);
};

const stream = new ReadableStream({
  start(controller) {
    startEnqueuing(controller);
```

  },

  cancel() {
    // This is called if the reader cancels.
    clearInterval(interval);
  },
});

> let result = '';
> const reader = stream.getReader();
> 
> const readStream = async () => {
>   // The `read()` method returns a promise that
>   // resolves when a value has been received.
>   const { done, value } = await reader.read();
>   // Result objects contain two properties:
>   // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
>   // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
>   if (done) {
>     return console.log(`Stream complete.\n${result}`);
>   }
>   result += value;
>   console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
>   console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
>   // Read some more, and call this function again.
>   readStream();
> };
> readStream();

Author: ```suggestion
async function concatStringStream(stream) {
  let result = '';
  const reader = stream.getReader();
  while (true) {
    // The `read()` method returns a promise that
    // resolves when a value has been received.
    const { done, value } = await reader.read();
    // Result objects contain two properties:
    // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
    // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
    if (done) return result;
    result += value;
    console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
    console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
  }
}
concatStringStream(stream).then((result) => console.log('Stream complete', result));
```

    },

    autoAllocateChunkSize: DEFAULT_CHUNK_SIZE,
  });
}
```

The second, likewise optional, argument of the `ReadableStream()` constructor is `queuingStrategy`.
It is an object that optionally defines a queuing strategy for the stream, which takes two
parameters:

- `highWaterMark`: A non-negative number indicating the high water mark of the stream using this queuing strategy.
- `size(chunk)`: A function that computes and returns the finite non-negative size of the given chunk value.
  The result is used to determine backpressure, manifesting via the appropriate `ReadableByteStreamController.desiredSize` property.
  It also governs when the underlying source's `pull()` method is called.

{% Aside %} You could define your own custom `queuingStrategy`, or use an instance of
[`ByteLengthQueuingStrategy`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ByteLengthQueuingStrategy)
or [`CountQueuingStrategy`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/CountQueuingStrategy)
for this object value. If no `queuingStrategy` is supplied, the default used is the same as a
`CountQueuingStrategy` with a `highWaterMark` of `1`. {% endAside %}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    reader.releaseLock();
    break;
  }
  // value is a Uint8Array.
  console.log(value);
}

// Write to the serial port.
const writer = port.writable.getWriter();
const data = new Uint8Array([104, 101, 108, 108, 111]); // hello
await writer.write(data);
// Allow the serial port to be closed later.
writer.releaseLock();
```

Finally, the [`WebSocketStream`](/websocketstream/) API integrates streams with the WebSocket API.

```js
const wss = new WebSocketStream(WSS_URL);
const { readable, writable } = await wss.connection;
const reader = readable.getReader();
const writer = writable.getWriter();

while (true) {
  const { value, done } = await reader.read();
  if (done) {
    break;
  }
  const result = await process(value);
  await writer.write(result);
}
```

## Useful resources

- [Streams specification](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/)
- [Accompanying demos](https://streams.spec.whatwg.org/demos/)
- [Streams polyfill](https://github.com/MattiasBuelens/web-streams-polyfill)
- [2016—the year of web streams](https://jakearchibald.com/2016/streams-ftw/)
- [Async iterators and generators](https://jakearchibald.com/2017/async-iterators-and-generators/)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- [Stream Visualizer](https://surma.dev/lab/whatwg-stream-visualizer/lab.html)

```

## Acknowledgements

This article was reviewed by
[Jake Archibald](https://jakearchibald.com/),
[François Beaufort](https://github.com/beaufortfrancois),

> [Sam Dutton](https://samdutton.com/), and

Author: ```suggestion
[Sam Dutton](https://samdutton.com/),
[Surma](https://surma.dev/), and
```

- `flush(controller)`: This method is called after all chunks written to the writable side have been
  transformed by successfully passing through `transform()`, and the writable side is about to be
  closed. Typically this is used to enqueue suffix chunks to the readable side, before that too
  becomes closed. If the flushing process is asynchronous, the function can return a promise to
  signal success or failure; the result will be communicated to the caller of
  `stream.writable.write()`. Additionally, a rejected promise will error both the readable and
  writable sides of the stream. Throwing an exception is treated the same as returning a rejected
  promise.

### The `writableStrategy` and `readableStrategy` queueing strategies

The second and third optional argument to the `TransformStream()` constructor takes optional
`writableStrategy` and `readableStrategy` queueing strategies. They are defined as outlined in the
[readable](/streams/#the-queuingstrategy) and the [writable](/streams/#the-queuingstrategy-2) stream
sections respectively.

### Transform stream code sample

The following code sample shows a simple transform stream in action.

```js

> const textEncoderStream = new TransformStream({

Author: ```suggestion
// Note that `TextEncoderStream` and `TextDecoderStream` exist now.
// This example shows how you would have done it before.
const textEncoderStream = new TransformStream({
```

    // Add the string to the stream.
    console.log(`Enqueued ${string}`);
    controller.enqueue(string);
  }, 1_000);

  setTimeout(() => {
    clearInterval(interval);
    // Close the stream after 10s.
    controller.close();
  }, 10_000);
};

const stream = new ReadableStream({
  start(controller) {
    startEnqueuing(controller);
  },

  cancel() {
    // This is called if the reader cancels.
    clearInterval(interval);
  },
});

async function concatStringStream(stream) {
  let result = '';
  const reader = stream.getReader();
  while (true) {
    // The `read()` method returns a promise that
    // resolves when a value has been received.
    const { done, value } = await reader.read();
    // Result objects contain two properties:
    // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
    // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
    if (done) return result;
    result += value;
    console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
    console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
  }
}
concatStringStream(stream).then((result) => console.log('Stream complete', result));
```

> The next (a bit contrived) code sample shows how you could implement a "shouting" service worker
> that uppercases all text by consuming the returned `fetch()` response promise

Author: ```suggestion
The next (a bit contrived) code sample shows how you could implement a "shouting" version of `fetch()`
that uppercases all text by consuming the returned response promise
```

  // After uppercasing, need to encode chunks again.
  const textEncoder = new TextEncoder();
  // Fetch the initial document and get access to the
  // reader of the readable stream. Error handling skipped for brevity.
  const response = await fetch(url);
  const readableStream = response.body;
  const reader = readableStream.getReader();
  // Create a new stream.
  const responseStream = new ReadableStream({
    // Called whenever the internal queue of chunks is not full.
    async pull(controller) {
      // Read the next chunk.
      let result = await reader.read();
      // Close the stream when done.
      if (result.done) {
        return controller.close();
      }
      // Uppercase each chunk (after decoding it).
      const upperCaseValue = textDecoder.decode(result.value).toUpperCase();
      // Enqueue the uppercased value (afer re-encoding it).
      controller.enqueue(textEncoder.encode(upperCaseValue));
      return result;
    },

    // Called when the reader cancels.
    cancel() {
      reader.cancel();
    },
  });
  // Return the new stream with the headers of the original response.
  return { stream: responseStream, headers: response.headers };
};

> ```

Author: ```js
function upperCaseStream() {
  return new TransformStream({
    transform(chunk, controller) {
      controller.enqueue(chunk.toUpperCase());
    },
  });
}

function appendToDomStream(el) {
  return new WritableStream({
    write(chunk) {
      el.append(chunk);
    }
  });
}

fetch('./lorem-psum.txt').then((response) =>
  response.body
    .pipeThrough(new TextDecoderStream())
    .pipeThrough(upperCaseStream())
    .pipeTo(appendToDomStream(document.body));
);
```

  let result = '';
  const reader = stream.getReader();
  while (true) {
    // The `read()` method returns a promise that
    // resolves when a value has been received.
    const { done, value } = await reader.read();
    // Result objects contain two properties:
    // `done`  - `true` if the stream has already given you all its data.
    // `value` - Some data. Always `undefined` when `done` is `true`.
    if (done) return result;
    result += value;
    console.log(`Read ${result.length} characters so far`);
    console.log(`Most recently read chunk: ${value}`);
  }
}
concatStringStream(stream).then((result) => console.log('Stream complete', result));
```

The next (a bit contrived) code sample shows how you could implement a "shouting" version of `fetch()`
that uppercases all text by consuming the returned response promise
[as a stream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API/Using_readable_streams#consuming_a_fetch_as_a_stream)
and uppercasing chunk by chunk. The advantage of this approach is that you do not need to wait for
the whole document to be downloaded, which can make a huge difference when dealing with large files.

```js

> self.addEventListener('fetch', (event) => {
>   // If the destination of the request is anything else
>   // than a document, return.
>   if (event.request.destination !== 'document') {
>     return;
>   }
>   event.respondWith(
>     (async () => {
>       // Create a new stream that implements the UPPERCASING.
>       const result = await shoutFetch(event.request.url);
>       // Return the newly created stream.
>       return new Response(result.stream, { headers: result.headers });
>     })(),
>   );
> });
> 
> const shoutFetch = async (url) => {
>   // Chunks arrive encoded, so need to decode them.
>   const textDecoder = new TextDecoder('utf-8', { stream: true });
>   // After uppercasing, need to encode chunks again.
>   const textEncoder = new TextEncoder();
>   // Fetch the initial document and get access to the
>   // reader of the readable stream. Error handling skipped for brevity.
>   const response = await fetch(url);
>   const readableStream = response.body;
>   const reader = readableStream.getReader();
>   // Create a new stream.
>   const responseStream = new ReadableStream({
>     // Called whenever the internal queue of chunks is not full.
>     async pull(controller) {
>       // Read the next chunk.
>       let result = await reader.read();
>       // Close the stream when done.
>       if (result.done) {
>         return controller.close();
>       }
>       // Uppercase each chunk (after decoding it).
>       const upperCaseValue = textDecoder.decode(result.value).toUpperCase();
>       // Enqueue the uppercased value (afer re-encoding it).
>       controller.enqueue(textEncoder.encode(upperCaseValue));
>       return result;
>     },
> 
>     // Called when the reader cancels.
>     cancel() {
>       reader.cancel();
>     },
>   });
>   // Return the new stream with the headers of the original response.
>   return { stream: responseStream, headers: response.headers };
> };

Author: ```suggestion
function upperCaseStream() {
  return new TransformStream({
    transform(chunk, controller) {
      controller.enqueue(chunk.toUpperCase());
    },
  });
}

function appendToDomStream(el) {
  return new WritableStream({
    write(chunk) {
      el.append(chunk);
    }
  });
}

fetch('./lorem-ipsum.txt').then((response) =>
  response.body
    .pipeThrough(new TextDecoderStream())
    .pipeThrough(upperCaseStream())
    .pipeTo(appendToDomStream(document.body));
);
```
